Introduction
Adam Smith emphasized the advantages of the division of labor on the famous ‘pin example’ in 1776. In this example, he observed a substantial increase in productivity resulting from the specialization of workers. In the 20th century, Henry Ford introduced assembly lines for complex products motivated by the use of conveyors in meat-processing plants in Chicago. Therefore, he complemented the specialization of workers by linking the material flow between them, accounting for a further increase in the manufacturing efficiency of standardized goods. With the advent of industrial robots, further efficiency gains in manufacturing resulted from the increasing levels of automation in subsequent decades, which are particularly popular in environments with high and steady product demand.

In the later decades of the 20th century, the industrial paradigm of economies of scale was expanded toward economies of scope as the differentiation of products became increasingly important and is widely spread in manufacturing corporations nowadays. The mass customization of products refers to corporations’ ability to provide customized products in high volumes at reasonable costs. The increasing demand for individualized products was accompanied by shorter product life cycles and expanding competition among industrial actors. Consequently, manufacturing companies must maintain a high degree of flexibility in their processes to account for the required product variety. The necessary planning of industrial production processes is usually decomposed. Frequently, this is based on the stages of the value chain (procurement, production, distribution, and sales) and the planning horizon (long-term, mid-term, short-term) they are associated with. The high product variety fundamentally changes the required processes in the production stage mainly due to the corporations’ increased exposure to demand variability regarding the total demand per period and its composition. A major challenge is therefore related to determining the ‘right’ levels of flexibility and efficiency of the manufacturing processes associated with the offered product portfolio.

The manufacturing processes are executed using manufacturing systems. A manufacturing system combines humans, machinery, and stations connected by a common material and information flow. In the design of manufacturing systems, a mapping of performance requirements expressed by specific performance indicators (e.g., cost, quality, flexibility, time) onto suitable values of decision variables that describe the physical design or the manner of operation of the manufacturing system is addressed. In academic literature, the overall manufacturing system design is decomposed into subproblems of manageable complexity. To this end, decisions on an appropriate quantity of individual resources (which we relate to as a collective term of human workers, machinery, and stations) are required (capacity decisions). Evaluating tradeoffs between resources of different flexibility gained attention in this field. Subsequently, the resources must be located on the shop floor (layout decisions). In these, decisions on the type of material handling system and the connection of resources are important. Further, the remaining flexibility maintained in the system must be specified for its particular assembly (configuration decisions). These relate to the resources (e.g., the selection of machine modes or the training of workers) or the material handling system (e.g., bundling of resources to a common material flow). Additionally, one may find it beneficial to anticipate superordinate or subordinate decisions. These address the allocation of aggregate forecasted product demand to multiple manufacturing sites of a corporation (production planning decisions), or the short-term execution of the production processes (control decisions).

In the past decades, several literature streams have been associated with the development of design approaches for manufacturing systems for different manufacturing paradigms aiming to provide a balance of efficiency and flexibility, the most renowned of which are flexible manufacturing systems (FMS), cellular manufacturing systems (CMS), and reconfigurable manufacturing systems (RMS). However, these literature streams individually refer to the characteristics they originally introduced and maintain different terminology. The lack of a uniform consideration of these approaches is also reflected by the overview of related literature reviews, which are mainly divided according to the literature streams. Therefore, it is not trivial to distinguish the different types of flexibility the approaches maintain. A classification scheme to classify design approaches for manufacturing systems is urgently needed to unite approaches of the FMS, CMS, and RMS literature streams and provide a common basis for considering flexibility in manufacturing system design.

As decision-making in the design of manufacturing systems considers a variety of design decisions and various aspects relevant to practice may restrict the decision makers’ possibilities for actions, a highly complex domain is faced necessitating the application of advanced analytical methods. Therefore, the objective of this paper is to review the use of Operations Research methods to facilitate the design of manufacturing systems with a focus on the considered flexibility types and their attributes. The review is based on 144 articles from the scientific literature selected in a systematic search and screening process. The analysis aims at highlighting the boundaries of knowledge and identifying potential research gaps.

The main contributions of this review are threefold. First, it provides a unification of previously disjunct literature streams focusing on flexibility in manufacturing system design. To provide a classification scheme of flexibility types consistent across the literature streams, the conceptual framework of ‘manufacturing flexibility’ is adapted. Second, the related methods are classified and the extent to which recent approaches from Operations Research support manufacturing system design is evaluated. Third, this article identifies blank spots based on the previously described analyses to guide future research from practical and methodical perspectives.

Major developments of flexibility in manufacturing system design
In the 1970s, manufacturing companies were increasingly confronted with shortened product life cycles, product mix and demand fluctuations, and a rapid change in process technology. At that time, the prevailing manufacturing paradigms focused on flexibility or efficiency. On the one hand, dedicated manufacturing systems specialized in producing low-variant products efficiently exploiting economies of scale; however, their specialization inhibited high flexibility. On the other hand, job shops were used to provide various products flexibly; however, the increasing product mix resulted in a further decline in the efficiency of job shops.

To increase efficiency and flexibility in manufacturing systems, the manufacturing paradigm of cellular manufacturing systems was created based on the concept of group technology. In CMS, group technology is utilized to physically divide the resources of a manufacturing system into separate cells (cell formation) and logically divide products into product families based on their similarity regarding design and required manufacturing operations (product family grouping). Each product family is subsequently assigned to one manufacturing cell. By grouping complementary resources for the product family production, intercellular material handling is reduced, the control of operations is enhanced, and setup times and work-in-process inventory are reduced. Unlike dedicated manufacturing systems, CMS offer increased possibilities to exploit the flexibility of the manufacturing system’s components.

At the same time, motivated by the advances in computer and numerical control techniques, independent research groups came up with other means to overcome the lack of flexibility in dedicated manufacturing systems. They advanced the development of the manufacturing paradigm of flexible manufacturing systems (FMS). FMS consist of integrated, computer-controlled complexes of automated material handling devices and machine tools to process a variety of product types simultaneously. To enable the processing of different product types, the machines are equipped with tool magazines that allow for automated tool changes without significant setup time and are operated in standardized stations. Thus, FMS reduce labor costs and lead times compared to job shops by incorporating a high degree of automation while maintaining the efficiency of dedicated manufacturing systems. The manufacturing paradigm of flexible manufacturing systems was developed to serve the production of medium-sized volumes of a variety of products. Changes in demand and product variants are anticipated a priori in the design phase of FMS. Thus, the paradigm of FMS maintains generalized flexibility.

In the 1990s, computer-aided design dramatically reduced product development times, leading to shorter product life cycles, dynamic product demand, and increased product customization possibilities. In this context, reconfigurable manufacturing systems (RMS) were introduced. RMS can be defined as manufacturing systems that offer the possibility to add, remove, interchange, or modify manufacturing components (i.e., reconfigurable machines, workers, stations, or material handling units) to respond to changing external developments. Unlike the integral architecture of FMS, RMS propose an architecture that facilitates the change of single components, mainly by relying on modular machine tools and open software architecture systems. RMS provide customized flexibility through reconfiguring the manufacturing system to adapt the ‘right’ level of flexibility when needed.

Consideration of flexibility in the design of manufacturing systems
5.1. Classification scheme for flexibility in the design of manufacturing systems
Manufacturing flexibility can be defined as the ability of a manufacturing system to adjust manufacturing resources to cope with changing circumstances caused by the environment with no or only a few penalties in time, cost, or performance. Manufacturing flexibility is considered as the property of the manufacturing systems’ machines, workers, stations (which we collectively refer to as resources), and material handling systems that are integrally designed and linked to each other to withstand varying production environments.

The flexibility types are classified into static basic flexibilities and dynamic system flexibilities. The four basic flexibilities are machine flexibility, labor flexibility, operation flexibility, and material handling flexibility. The four system flexibilities are mix flexibility, product flexibility, volume flexibility, and expansion flexibility.

5.2. Machine flexibility
Machine flexibility refers to the inherent capabilities of machines to perform different operations during the manufacturing process within corresponding processing times. It further describes the machines’ ability to be assigned and relocated in the manufacturing system.

5.3. Labor flexibility
Labor flexibility refers to the range of operations a worker can perform within corresponding processing times and the workers’ abilities to be assigned and relocated in the manufacturing system.

5.4. Operation flexibility
Operation flexibility describes the ability to change the sequence of operations required to manufacture each product during the manufacturing process. It, therefore, relates to the structure of the considered products and the exploitability of their inherent degrees of freedom.

5.5. Material handling flexibility
Material handling flexibility is inherent to the material handling system and describes the ability of the manufacturing system to transport workpieces between resources.

5.6. The impact of basic flexibilities on system flexibilities
The basic flexibilities jointly enable the following types of dynamic system flexibility.
Mix flexibility relates to its capability to respond quickly and economically to demand variations in the current product mix.
Product flexibility describes the ease with which new products can be added or substituted from the current manufacturing process.
Volume flexibility of a manufacturing system describes its ability to be operated economically at different output levels from a short-term perspective maintaining the design as installed beforehand.
Expansion flexibility describes the ability to operate economically at different output levels in which resources or material handling systems may be added to or removed from the existing system.